Good afternoon, everyone.
Welcome to session 516,
Graphics & Imaging Performance Tuning.
And the reason we're having this
session this year is because the fact
that I work in developer relations,
I get a lot of email for developers.
It's part of my job.
And a week, or practically a day,
doesn't go by that I don't get an email
from a developer who is going into
excruciatingly great detail on how I can
draw lines faster in Quick Draw under
Mac OS 9 than you can do on Mac OS X.
And a lot of that has to do with
the new visual architecture that's
in Mac OS X and the fact that
it's a different visual pipeline.
And we spent a lot of time at this
year's WWC addressing that issue with
things such as Quartz Extreme and
even optimizations that are in the
software Quartz compositor that
runs if you don't have a system
capable of supporting Extreme.
But the key thing is there's
a two-way street in this.
It's that since the visual
pipeline is different,
there are optimizations that
developers need to do to leverage
that pipeline appropriately.
And that's what we're going to
be talking about in this session.
We're going to talk about the tricks
and secrets to unlock some of the
performance you feel might be trapped
in your applications on Mac OS X.
So to start the presentation,
I'd like to invite Haroon Shaikh,
manager of the Quartz
engineering department,
to the stage.
Thanks, Travis.
What are we going to cover today?
Primarily, we're going to be looking at
performance tuning from the
perspective of the course compositor,
as Travis mentioned,
but also look at QuickDraw performance
on Mac OS X for Carbon applications.
We'll have a few demos,
and the rest of the talk,
we'll actually spend some time looking
at tips and recommendations from us
to you on QuickDraw and Quartz 2D.
So since Mac OS X 10.0,
performance has been an issue.
10.1 addressed many of those issues.
Jaguar continues to address many of
the other issues with performance.
What I'll be doing through the
rest of the talk is punctuating
the slides with what we've done
with system level optimizations
and recommendations for you.
Some of the contents of the talk has
actually come from developers like
you looking at performance feedback,
some of the things that
they've been struggling with.
So your feedback has always been
important and going forward,
let us know if you still
have performance concerns.
We're going to be talking about
the quartz compositor today,
Quartz 2D, and also Quick Draw,
which is part of Carbon.
So this is part of the
architecture diagram.
So hopefully by now you know
what the Quartz compositor is.
It's responsible for
all your screen display.
It takes content from multiple
applications and sends that over
to the frame buffer for display.
This year we've actually
introduced Quartz Extreme,
and that's actually using hardware
acceleration to perform the composite
operation on the GPU itself.
So it's actually freed up a lot
of the CPU for other processing.
People have asked, you know,
we don't have access to the screen,
give it to us,
or we want to just get to the
screen as fast as possible.
You now understand why we've actually
done this with the new architecture.
And we've accomplished this primarily
because we've had this window
backwrapper abstraction so that
you draw into your back-end store
the windowing system on Mac OS X.
And the Quartz compositor will be
responsible for taking that content
and flushing that to the screen.
So this is the architecture slide
for the software compositor.
You've got applications that are
drawing into some form of a buffer,
be it the window backing
store or surfaces.
The Quartz compositor takes the content
from those buffers and composites them
and sends them off to the frame buffer.
The buffers themselves are a shared piece
of memory that is shared between the
application and the course compositor.
So in order for an application
to draw into that buffer,
they're usually calling Quartz 2D or
Quick Draw to draw into that buffer.
And when Quartz 2D or
Quick Draw draws into that buffer,
they have to lock down the bits,
draw into it, and unlock the bits,
and then call the flush operation.
Then the compositor takes over and
performs its compositing magic.
For Jaguar,
we've actually introduced Quartz
Extreme that you've heard about already.
And Quartz Extreme is performing
hardware acceleration.
It's taking...
The same buffer content,
pushing that to the frame buffer,
letting the GPU pick the bits up
from the window backing stores.
You'll notice compared to
the software compositor,
there is hardware
acceleration being used here.
That's not to say the software compositor
does not use any hardware acceleration.
The software compositor does
use hardware acceleration,
especially, for example,
if you're doing opaque window drags.
So it's not to say that there's
only hardware acceleration
in the Quartz Extreme.
So the first piece of recommendation
we normally come up with
is avoid the extra buffer.
People are used to drawing to
yet another off-screen buffer,
taking those contents,
performing a copy bits operation
into your Windows Backing Store.
So avoid that wherever possible.
Once again, buffers cost extra memory.
The copy bits operation
is yet another step.
So if wherever possible,
try and avoid it.
You've also got off-screen
windows in your application.
These are windows that
have been ordered out.
You want to avoid them, primarily,
once again, because these buffers
will consume memory.
What we recommend is always use
one-shot windows so that all your
off-screen windows will have disappeared.
The buffer contents will
disappear in the sense that when
you order a window on screen,
you draw into it.
Now when you order it out
because you minimized or you've
hidden the application window,
if you're using one-shot windows,
the buffer content disappears.
When those are ordered back in
because you've maximized or you've
ordered those windows back in,
that's when you'll get a
window repainted message.
And that's usually much,
much faster than paging in the
back-in-store memory off of disk.
So unless you've got really content
in your buffers that takes a long,
long time for you to draw,
always use one-shot windows.
And Carbon and Cocoa do this differently,
so look at how they
recommend you do this,
but always use those wherever possible.
Another common mistake that developers
end up doing is you create a window,
you then look at the preference
file somewhere to determine
what the size of the window
should be and resize the window.
Once again, this is just redundant
operations in the system.
You're putting up a window that
is going to be destroyed anyways,
so make sure you specify the
window size appropriately.
In order for us to continue maintaining
a backing store abstraction,
we're asking people not to
assume that the backing store
will be in system memory.
It can move.
This will allow us to further add future
performance optimizations in the system.
Now,
flushing is the operation that actually
takes your content from the window
back buffer or from the buffer and
sends that off to the frame buffer.
Now, flushing can be done both
implicitly or explicitly for you.
Implicitly by Carbon or Cocoa.
When you've done your drawing,
at the end of the update,
Carbon or Cocoa will send off a
flush request on your behalf to
flush all the dirty regions that
have been accumulated so far.
You may also choose to
do your own flushing.
And you can use
Quick Draw Flush Port Buffer,
CG Context Flush,
or even an AppKit Flush Window.
One thing to keep in mind about
flushing is flushing is asynchronous.
So what that means is basically when you
execute the flush command or when the
application executes the flush command,
the window compos-- the software--
the Quartz compositor is actually
responsible for taking those
bits and sending them off.
You are free to go and
do whatever you want.
So we'll have a demo showing how you can
take advantage of asynchronous flushing.
The flush operation does not
block until it's completed.
It's only when you lock down the
bits again whenever you do issue
yet another drawing command.
If the flush has not succeeded by then,
that's the time when the lock
will actually block until the
previous flush has completed.
So take advantage of that.
Make sure you do not execute
any redundant flushing.
Delay your drawing until you need to.
keep it together as much as possible.
Now, as has been mentioned before,
the fastest way to get your bits to
the screen or to the frame buffer
is to draw into your window backing
store and execute that flush command.
The Quartz compositor will take all
opportunities on the system to send
that over the bus and send that to
the frame buffer as fast as possible.
Now, with Quartz Extreme,
we're using AGP transfer.
Those backing stores are
textured through OpenGL.
It's being pulled off the system
memory as fast as possible.
Another thing to keep in mind
about flushing is all flushing
is actually beam synced.
And that's primarily to give you
that nice visual presentation that
Mac OS X does where everything
appears to the screen atomically.
There's no window tearing.
So on CRTs, you've got a refresh rate of
anywhere from 60 to 120 hertz
depending on your monitor.
But keep in mind,
LCD panels also happen to have
a screen update frequency.
And as a result,
they are typically at 60 hertz also.
If you're trying to flush
anything faster than 60 hertz,
your eye is not going to see it.
Those are just redundant operations,
so try and avoid those.
Try and shoot for a refresh rate of
anywhere from 30 to 60 frames per second.
Those are reasonable rates
for your application.
If you're not getting
those type of rates,
profile, try and find out what's
going on in the system.
A new feature for Jaguar
is scroll acceleration.
Usually the slowest part
of any memory transfer from
main memory to system memory,
that's the slowest part usually.
With Course Extreme,
it's actually faster,
but the more you can minimize
the amount of data transfer,
the better.
So for Jaguar,
we've actually accelerated scrolling.
And we do that by only sending
over across the bus what is the
new region that's been updated.
At the lowest level,
this operation is three times faster.
You may not see a factor of three in
your application necessarily because
there's usually lots more going on.
So scroll rack and a scroll view,
any imaging that you do through
CG will have roughly about a
30% improvement depending on
how much area is being scrolled.
The recommendation here is use
scroll rec wherever possible.
We'll show in the demo where there
are cases where scroll recs or scroll
views are not being used appropriately,
and so scroll acceleration
is not necessarily hooked up.
In Jaguar,
if you're copying from a window back
buffer into the same window back buffer,
if you're using core graphics or quarts,
this will also take advantage
of this optimization.
QuickDraw currently isn't,
but for Jaguar we will make sure that
that will also take advantage of this.
Okay.
You're also familiar with overlays,
but in case you're not,
overlays are nothing more than
a series of layers of content.
And in this example,
you've got a transparent window
with some controls on top of the
content that you can compose on
top of your existing content.
So with Corts Extreme,
we've actually made overlays
accelerated in the sense that
The transparency tax that was
present with the course compositor
is no longer a tax anymore,
and primarily because all of
the compositing is actually
being done in the GPU,
so feel free to take
advantage of overlays,
you know,
come up with nice applications that take
advantage of overlays in the system.
You can use overlays in your system by,
in Carbon,
using the Carbon Overlay window class,
Cocoa, you can do the same thing
with a different approach.
You can always fall back to
Quartz to clear the window so
that all the alpha is set to zero,
and then from that point onwards
you can start drawing on top of it,
and you effectively have
an overlay on your window.
Keep in mind that if you use Quartz,
Iteris, Plex, Alpha,
Quickdraw is generally alpha agnostic.
So anything you draw into
your transparent window
through Quickdraw will touch,
set the alpha to FF when it's
drawing into the window buffer.
Yet another feature for Jaguar
is backing stroke compression.
So you've heard about it
already in a previous session.
But all it is,
is you've got windows that are
generally inactive in the system.
After a delay of 5 to 10 seconds,
those windows will become
compressed and the Quartz compositor
takes care of that for you.
They get decompressed only when
you write into that backing store,
so try and avoid redundant drawing into
your backing store when not necessary.
You don't want to necessarily
compress/decompress,
but the system is
pretty smart about that.
On average, we get a compression ratio of
anywhere from 3:1 to 4:1 and really
depends on the window contents
that you've got on your screen.
One of the reasons it's a benefit is the
Quartz compositor can actually composite
that directly from the compressed data,
only decompressing what's necessary.
The backing storage remains compressed
unless you're drawing into it.
So this is a system level
optimization that does not
require any changes on your part.
It should be completely
transparent to you.
Other areas of performance
tunings are related to the
use of the velocity engine.
So for Jaguar,
we've got some more graphics operations
that are now taking advantage of it.
The software Quartz compositor
is now fully vectorized,
so it's not to say that there
hasn't been any performance
tuning on the software compositor.
That's taking advantage
of the velocity engine.
There are blitters in the
system that are now taking
advantage of the velocity engine.
The example I show is QuickDrawCopyBits
when you're copying into
a Windows Backing Store.
That's not done yet,
but we're looking at doing that shortly.
And also Backing Store Compression is
taking advantage of vectorized code.
This is a simple recommendation.
If you happen to allocate
your own bitmaps,
make sure that the row bytes that
you specify are divisible by 16,
as that will allow more optimizations
to kick in on the Velocity Engine.
And now I'd like to actually bring up
Ralph Bruhner to talk about Quartz Debug.
Okay, I'm going to do a few demos here.
First thing I'd like to show
is the asynchronous flushing
that Haroon was mentioning.
So I have a little app here that,
when it's started,
does quite a bit of floating
point computation and just renders
frames from the mental road sets.
First thing I'd like to show is if you
don't make use of asynchronous flushing,
by the way in the bottom right corner we
have this little speedometer here which
essentially is the frame rate counter.
It measures the number of frames
that the quartz compositor pumps out.
So it works for everything in the system,
even the Docker.
So, without asynchronous flushing,
you can see the needle peaks at 40,
45 frames per second.
And from then on it will
drop slowly because the
computation gets more expensive.
The same thing with
asynchronous flashing.
And we're peaking at 55, 58 or so.
So the only difference between these
two modes is there's a timer firing
60 times a second because the goal
is to produce 60 frames per second.
And at the beginning we do
some computation to render the
next frame and then we draw it.
And this is quite natural way to do
things and it exploits asynchronous
flushing without any additional
work because in the first part where
you actually do the computation,
during that time the previous
frame can be flushed to the screen.
So when I disable this little checkbox
here to defeat asynchronous flushing,
the only thing I do is right before
I do a computation I draw a single
pixel in one of these windows.
And that causes us to hit that lock
to wait until the flush has happened
and then we start the computation.
And as we see this really can make
15 frames per second difference.
Okay.
The next thing I'd like
to show is Quartz Debug,
which is a tool that is,
it was in 10.1 and it's
slightly improved for Jaguar.
What it helps you doing is it
turns the Quartz compositor,
it turns the certain debug flags
on in the Quartz compositor.
So for example, I can select flash screen
updates and from then on,
whenever an application flushes,
The error that gets flushed flashes in
yellow first for a short period of time.
And so you can see what
kind of drawing is going on.
This is a good thing to find out if you
flush certain things multiple times.
If you thought you didn't do any drawing
in a certain area and it flashes,
then it's probably an indication
that some part of your code is
executed there where you probably
didn't want it to execute.
So, to illustrate that,
we can look at scroll
acceleration in Jaguar.
So when I scroll in text edit,
we see only the bottom part,
the part that needs to be redrawn
from one frame to the next,
is actually redrawn.
And the part in the middle just
gets the hardware acceleration.
So for comparison,
if I look at Project Builder,
Project Builder flushes
actually everything.
So we're going to fix that
for the final release.
Okay.
So,
other flags you have in Quartz Debug is
Autoflush drawing,
which is whenever a primitive is drawn,
we immediately call flush.
So that simulates a bit like the
Mac OS 9 style drawing where you
see drawing trickle on the screen.
So when I go and change stuff here,
you see everything flickers
because everything is drawn
and immediately shown.
Most interesting,
this is... that sounded like Yoda.
Sorry.
You can see this when you
turn both of these on.
You say Auto Flush Drawing and you
say Flush in Yellow whenever we flush.
So you can switch to an application.
And then for example see how the
menu is drawn or how individual text
lines are drawn and stuff like that.
So, because the entire system
goes into that mode,
things tend to be really, really slow.
And what you can do about that is
we have this little hotkey here.
This is control option command T.
So you can only turn it on for those
drawings you're interested in and not,
usually you're not
optimizing the menu drawings,
so that's kind of helpful.
There's also a really
mean switch up here,
which is called Flash Identical Updates.
So Quartz then does quite a bit
of work when the area that gets
flushed gets compared before it's
flushed against what's already in
the screen and it flashes in red
whichever pixel hasn't changed.
So if you do drawing that is redundant,
then everything shows up in red.
So as an example,
I can see that the carrot here
has a little red border around it
because these bits get flushed.
Now, these of course are a really small
area and we don't really care about it,
but the interesting thing is
if I move the cursor around,
we see that that little bar up there
is redrawn for every cursor movement,
and that's, for example,
one of the things you should
look out for and optimize.
Okay.
The last feature of Quartz
Debug is Show Window List.
So it gives you this
little NSBrowser view.
of all the windows on the system and
the applications that created them.
So for example, I have Quartz debug here.
So there is one window
which is 4.5 kilobytes,
another one is 270 kilobytes,
and another one is 88.
So the 88 one is 1K by 22 pixels,
so that's our menu bar.
The other one is 270k.
It's this little window with
the nice quartz image in it.
And then there's a third one
which is an off-screen image,
which is essentially the little checkbox
which is cached in an off-screen image.
So what you can do is you can look
at the windows that have been created
by your application and try to avoid
windows that are off-screen because
they're just taking up memory and they're
mapped into a different address space
where they probably don't need to be.
So this is kind of a handy tool.
You can also go and sort by size and
then by application and then you have
every application at the top list.
Terminal has a 700 something kilobytes
window here and stuff like that.
Another thing here...
So we have one in Finder has 330K and has
a little C behind the kilobytes number.
C means compressed.
So these are the windows that got
were idle for more than 10
seconds or so and then got
compressed by the Windows server.
So another thing to look out for,
if your application has Windows on
screen and after 20 seconds or
so they're still not compressed,
maybe you're dirting them continuously
and that's a hint to look at.
Essentially, the recommendation is, well,
you know, if you're idle,
don't do anything because it spoils
other optimizations in the system.
Okay, with that,
that was it for the demo.
Now I would like to invite
Joseph Maurer up here.
Freedom for Lower Bavaria!
Now I got your attention.
I know it's Friday afternoon,
we're all tired, we want to go home.
That's why I'm going to
make it sweet and short.
This is some kind of table of contents.
I was thinking about how
to present this subject.
One idea was
First, to convince you that all the
rumors about bad performance
of Quick Draw on 10 are wrong,
and then to explain why
Quick Draw is so slow on 10
But this wouldn't work well.
So it's just a potpourri of
What comes to mind in this matter?
First item: I hate benchmarks.
Everybody can write
applications that run slow,
right?
You don't need to make an effort.
And you cannot believe how many bugs
I have received over the last two years.
Benchmark bugs that said,
"This benchmark runs 20 times
as slow on 10 than on 9." Yeah,
alright.
I know.
I guess that's why I'm here now, right?
Not that I wouldn't want to make
some jokes here from time to time.
Of course I use benchmarks to
sample and to figure out why
we have all these performance
problems on 10 with Quick Draw.
So my favorites are sampling
and microsecond timing.
The question came up yesterday
how to determine execution times.
My favorite is uptime.
It gives my machine
multiples of 40 nanoseconds.
That's good enough.
And I can convert it and
display and work with it.
Well,
we have learned over the whole week,
I guess, that frames per second
The favorite benchmark on systems
before X don't work well on X.
In order to figure out how many
frames you get on the screen,
you would have to flush each frame.
And flushing just chokes up when it goes
beyond the refresh rate of the display.
So, reduce flushing.
And the benchmark, the frames per second
benchmark is broken.
There's this other item
of hardware acceleration.
Ever since it became
known that on Mac OS X
Quick Draw would be tricked into drawing
into a window buffer in RAM instead
of directly into VRAM on corresponding
to the screen's frame buffer.
Everybody understood that this
[Transcript missing]
If instead you have to write them
out in your even optimized software
split loop you're going to suffer.
And that's one aspect
of what we have seen.
You know, ever since Quick Draw has
been tricked into
Drawing into the window
back buffer instead of the
screen as it still believes.
Somebody has to give in the whole big
picture of the forward vision that
you have learned about this week.
And QuikTour is the one to give
here in this specific case.
On the other hand,
don't believe that just because
these specific copy bits
operations onto the destination,
if it's the screen destination,
the window,
are not highly accelerated anymore,
that everything is just hopeless
now for QuikTour drawing.
For one, fortunately,
all this hardware acceleration
on 9 and previous systems
is not as good as you think.
Which is good for me because so
I can get at situations where
QuikTour on 10 is actually faster.
The other...
The idea about comes from I mean has
been spelled out by Peter Graffagnino.
Peter Graffagnino,
one of his favorite sentences is you
know by the end of the day everybody
will have many more processor
cycles everything will be faster.
He doesn't say which day.
You may have seen that I have
demos in preparation so by
the end of today we will see
situations where things are faster.
Meanwhile, you have had time to read
the reasoning why hardware
acceleration on X is different,
how it is different,
and I try to convince you that
it's eventually from the narrow
point of view of Quick Draw,
it's not such a big deal after all.
What tends to be a big deal potentially
in some situations is the additional
requirement for QuickDraw to maintain
a dirty region for each drawing.
You do not want in each
flushing operation,
even if you do it only 60 times a second,
you do not want to flush the
whole window content each time.
So the maintenance of the dirty
region turns out to be costly.
It gets costly with increasing
complexity of the region.
I'm not sure but the
The penalty of region processing
goes at least with the square
of the region complexity.
It might be worse.
When, for one, you have a very often a
non-trivial clip region.
Each time a simple, dirty rectangle, say,
gets added to the dirty region,
it gets intersected with the clip region.
And we cannot do anything
about it if we would not,
so many clients depend on the
region to be flushed eventually be
intersected with the clip region.
Think about the finder's desktop,
for example.
CopyBits the whole desktop content
and just clips out the little icon
surfaces that need to be updated.
The finder relies on it.
If it would not each time intersect,
the finder would each time
flush the whole screen surface.
You have an intersection,
you have a region reunion,
and all in all ends up in
the samples when you do your
sampling of performance problems.
So after some time of learning,
we came up with the right approach,
the right trick, which is
To set the dirty region before
you start a sequence of drawing
to a big rectangular region,
just as big as you need for your drawing,
and go from there.
And it turns out that
things go miraculously much,
much faster.
The worst case is a drawing where you
do a lot of math and then each time
you found some convergence point,
you plot the single point.
You get a point here, a point there,
a point here, a point there,
and after a while you're waiting
until you get 100,000 points.
Well, this is the worst case for regions.
Each time you add a single
isolated point to a region.
And these are the cases we are
drawing on 10 when compared
with 9 in the same Carbon app.
It's not just 20 times slower.
It can be much, much slower even.
Fortunately, many of you have made the
experience asking themselves now,
"Why didn't I run into this?"
I never observed this type of problem
because you did a big erase rect on
your window content before you started
drawing and this erase rect dirtied the
whole rectangle so all the additional
little drawings they got shortcut,
the region processing realized
I don't have anything to do it's
already completely enclosed and this
makes the problem go away but if the
region you erased was not a simple
rectangle but was clipped with some
some fancy clip region instead then
you are running into the problem
and finally another candidate for
optimization of quick draw on ten
which just doesn't exist on nine
is this Locked Port Pits story.
Because of the fact that
each window buffer now is
managed by the Windows Server,
and when you start drawing into it,
you need to make sure that it gets locked
down and that you have access to it,
you need to make this
lock port it's called.
Quick Draw needs to do this for
each and every single API call,
even if it's just to set a single point,
a single pixel.
I have been told over many many months
that Lockport is negligible performance
wise and certainly it is if your drawing
thanks to dirty region management or
such is so slow that it doesn't show up.
Once you are getting in the range where
you are teasing it out then it does make
a difference and we will look at that.
So the principle here is lock port bits
can be nested and once they are nested,
once you have the lock,
it just increments the lock count and
doesn't basically cost anything anymore.
Why do I say be careful?
System 10 has become pretty complicated
and many things are going on on the
Windows Server side which are often,
when you look at it,
counter-intuitive or puzzling.
Holding a lock,
and there are other people here who
know this much better than I do,
can under certain circumstances stress
the tolerance of the system design.
And you may end up in problems which
we would not like to have to deal with.
The rule of thumb is
don't push it too hard.
Try to get everything done within a
couple seconds at most or release the
lock and then come back and continue.
At this point in time,
I would like to bring up
on stage Phil Schiller,
Senior Vice President of
Worldwide Product Marketing.
Yeah, I guess not.
What I meant to do was to put him on
the 10 machine and I would have used
the system 9 and then we would have done
our competition and I would have won.
- Well, I have to do it alone.
Before we switch a couple
of words to scrolling,
the scrolling demo is a no-show.
I said I hated benchmarks,
I hate scrolling benchmarks even more.
I don't want,
I hate it when it scrolls too fast.
And I have a bad experience
with scrolling benchmarks from
a couple years ago on 8.5.
I got in the last weeks before final a
bug that text drawing was so damn slow,
terribly slow, big disaster.
And the way the tester measured it was by
scrolling through a long text document.
It took me hours to
figure out that in fact,
HIToolbox, the control manager,
had put in throttles to
slow down scrolling due to
a user interface request.
So that's why.
This doesn't mean that
scrolling is not the problem.
Why is scrolling a problem?
Has been a problem up until now
is because Quick Draw has to do
this huge massive move of bytes
in the backing store before it
can get flushed and show up.
Whereas before scrolling
happened right in video RAM.
So for Jaguar, scrolling as you have
learned has been accelerated.
It has been hooked up to uh,
the scroll-rect call-in quick draw.
It still is not hooked up completely
to a pure direct copy bits call
in cases where it could be used.
This is going to happen next week.
But still,
the problems which Ralph showed
where somebody scrolls a window
content and everything gets yellow
may not even have to do with
improper use of scroll rect or such.
I know that it's much easier when
you have a huge document and the
window really is just a window into
this document to maintain the source
rectangle and just do a single copy
of it while you are scrolling through.
The problem is, in this case,
the scroll rect optimization that
now goes back to hardware accelerated
scrolling cannot be applied.
There's no way.
Which means,
it means more work for you to replace
this simple copy bits call with a
moving source rectangle by some more
bookkeeping and a direct scroll rect
call in the window and then filling
in the little area that gets exposed.
This was what I had to add
to scrolling and then finally
we get to the demo machine,
please.
So we are coming to the second.
Yeah, this machine is faster
than my machine at home.
We got these reports about frame rates.
Now suddenly here I display frame rates.
355, pretty good.
The window is too small.
Yeah, that's more like it.
You see that we spend 8 milliseconds
for so many copy-witch calls.
During 1.8 seconds and we spend 106
microseconds in the flash port buffer
on average the theoretical frame rate is
the number of copy bits calls per second
that came out of one of the G worlds.
I have 20 G worlds in the background.
They differ only by a little
moving out of this pattern.
Of course I don't flush 111 times,
but I could.
So if I would,
I flush 80 times per second,
I flush 90 times per second and so on.
And if you watch,
maybe we don't get so far
here and we won't waste time.
You should play around with this at home.
and then run into puzzling situations
and convince yourself that just don't
do it because we won't help you fix it.
You run into situations where it doesn't
make sense to flush 140 times a second.
It depends on hardware,
it depends on many other instances.
It's a similar game as
the one that Ralph demoed.
If you start drawing,
in this case copy bits before the
previous flush has completed then
you're just locking up and suddenly
your copy bits calls themselves
appear to become much slower.
Why would copy bits become slower?
It's always the same code.
Well, something secret is
going on in the system.
The application gets starved
out of processor cycles.
It's held back.
And these are subtle things.
They are too complicated for myself.
So, um,
play around with it but don't take it
as an invitation and an encouragement
and to heat up the frame rate race.
What I like much more, my favorite,
is this one.
There's a long story to it and the
drawing is so slow that I thought
I had time to tell the story.
Well here it turns out
that it's not that slow.
But imagine that this wireframe drawing
comes from a real world application and
the people want to design the architects.
They want to turn this around
interactively and in real
time make modifications to it.
With waiting 7 seconds or up to 20-30
seconds on slower machines for this
to redraw is completely impossible.
By the way on system 9 the same
drawing takes 2 seconds instead of 7.
which is still way too slow.
So what did Jean-Paul Armand do?
He wrote his own Brezenham and brought
it down to something under half a second.
So with less than half a
second you can push it around
the cathedral and work on it.
and when he found out
that on system 10 his
On system 10.1,
here we are running Jaguar,
which is different.
On 10.1, he spent about 20 seconds
redrawing the wireframe.
He made a big noise on the development
list and I took him aside and said hey
let's work on this together and the first
thing we figured out was the dirty region
processing is there so a hidden key
and David B.
By the way, these two applications,
they will show up hopefully
next week or sometime soon on
developer.appl.com with the source
code so you can really figure out what
I'm doing there and what's going on.
So with something like
two-thirds of a second,
that's not so bad.
But remember there was something
else on the slides which we
could use to improve performance.
The key L for lock port bits.
There you go.
Now it's better than his brazen hum.
So now you can go home and tell your
people there was an old Bavarian
who taught an old dog new tricks.
Thanks Joseph.
So Joseph's just showing you how you
can actually get performance on quick
draw applications to what you expected.
So take advantage of those two tips.
Going forward,
I will spend the rest of the
session talking about tips and
tricks in general regarding Quartz,
2D, and Quickdraw also.
So one of the biggest requests we've
had during the last year or two is,
Quartz has this great anti-aliasing,
how can I get this in
my Carbon application?
We've actually added this feature in
for Jaguar so that this will allow you
to have carts render your glyphs for
you and you will get the same level
of text-centered aliasing quality that
you see in the rest of the system.
We do this using the new
API called Quick Draw,
swap text flags.
It's not on by default,
and I'll mention why later.
But you can use this to
pass in the first flag,
which is use CG text rendering.
Here we're using Core Graphics of
Quartz to do the rendering of the text,
but using the metrics in QuickDraw.
If you choose, you can actually use CG to
do the rendering and at the
same time use the CG metrics.
The difference between the
two is one will cause a relay
out because QuickDraw metrics,
you're used to, you know how the text
is going to position.
It's only the glyph will
be rendered with Quartz.
Using CG text metrics,
they are subpixel positions,
so you've got fractional
components in there,
and as a result,
you'll actually get better-looking text.
So you want to take advantage,
make the decision which
one you prefer better,
and use that in your application.
You can always fall back to the
traditional quick draw rendering
using the last flag I mentioned here.
Using Quick Draw Soft Text Flags,
that's an application-wide setting.
If you want,
you can also do it on a per-put basis
using the API I mentioned at the bottom.
One of the reasons it's not on by
default is there are limitations.
Quickdraw's imaging model is
different from Quartz's imaging model,
so not all the text styles and
transfer modes are supported.
So in those cases, it will fall back to
Quickdraw text rendering.
There is a feature in Quick Draw called
Glyph Squishing that fixed the
rendering of glyphs where the font
styles-- the font itself did not
have correct vertical metrics.
So we'll actually do some
squishing of the glyphs.
That's once again not
supported in Quartz.
Just recognize that that's
not going to be there.
Using CG text metrics
will cause relay out,
as I mentioned earlier,
and because it's actually
positioned on a subpixel boundary,
it will be slower.
So that's why it's up to
you as a developer to make a
decision as to whether you want
CG rendering in your system or not,
or whether you want
text to reflow or not.
We cannot do this on by default
in the system because every
application is different.
There will be a Q&A available for this
discussing these things in more detail.
So you've got a Carbon application,
you want to move over to using
Quartz 2D in your application.
You've got a Quick Draw port.
How do you get a CG context?
You use Quick Draw's Begin CG context.
That gives you a context for that port.
You go ahead, do your port rendering,
and then when you're done with it,
you do a quick draw and CG context.
You cannot intersperse quick
draw rendering inside of that.
If you want to do that,
you have to perform the end CG context.
One common thing that most people run
into is they forget to flush the context.
So before the end CG context,
make sure you do call the
CG context flush routine.
That's how you'll get your
content onto the screen.
But given that we've
already mentioned that,
you know, avoid redundant flushing,
what you may instead want to choose to
do is to use a CG context synchronized.
And what that will do is you
may have multiple contexts,
multiple controls,
multiple views that are all
drawing at the same drawing.
You don't want all of those
to flush on their own.
You want it all to appear atomically.
Use a CG context synchronized
instead of the flush routine.
And that will add to the dirty region
and so that when at the end of the
event loop when Carbon does its
flushing of all the dirty region,
it will all come up as one single flush.
Another tip related to this
is you should now be able to
replace your poster picture
comments with Quartz 2D rendering.
So where you've got existing
poster picture comments,
replace those using a
Begin CG Context drawer.
Do the equivalent rendering using Quartz,
primarily because the imaging model is
the same between PDF and PostScript.
So that should be an
easy transition for you.
You can use that.
And the benefit there is it's not only
going to print on PostScript printers,
but it will also print on ink charts.
Another nice feature that we have
added that has been there since 10.1
is the ability to actually render
PIC drawings into a CG context.
So the benefit you get here
is it actually uses CG to
do the rendering of the PIC.
It will also respect any of the
Quartz 2D transformations that you
may have set up into the context,
and now you can actually
rotate your pics,
transform them however
you want them to be.
Other simple benefits you will get
is it actually substitutes shades of
gray instead of the PIXMAP patterns
that you might be used to.
So it's better shown as an example.
So this is Quickdraw rendering the PICT.
And now this is Quartz
rendering the PICT.
And as I was mentioning,
all your vector line art is
actually rendered using Quartz,
and your pattern has been
replaced by a shade of gray.
There are limitations to this,
once again, given the two imaging
models being different.
So there's no special transfer modes
that are present in Quick Draw.
The CG doesn't necessarily have those,
so stay away from XR.
We don't necessarily
support them in Quartz 2D.
There is also a performance difference.
One is using native quick draw
to actually render the pic.
The other one is actually going
through a conversion process.
But this is a good opportunity for you
to actually convert your pics into PDF,
which is the recommended
way of processing these.
It's very easy to create a PDF context,
make this single call to draw
that pic into the PDF context,
and now you've actually
converted your pic into a PDF.
Another common request we have is how
do I actually get my graphics importers
in QuickTime to work with Quartz?
We're working with the QuickTime team to
better integrate the two technologies,
but in the meantime we've actually
got some sample code that I'll
just quickly go over today.
In this case,
all we're doing is we're creating a
32-bit ARGB G World on off-screen buffer.
Get the graphics imported to
actually draw into that buffer.
One of the limitations of this is
everything is flattened into 32-bit ARGB.
So if you happen to have
an image that is CMYK,
you would have to make
that choice on your own,
or be it any other color
space or 8-bit or 16-bit data.
Don't forget color profiles.
Everything is managed.
Using color sync in Quartz.
So get the color profile,
color sync color profile from QuickTime.
Convert that into a CG color space.
There's a convenience function
that we provide for you to do that.
Once you've got that,
you can get all your information about
that image using the graphics importer.
And when you create the image,
like the width, height,
the alpha information, anything else,
that's available from
the graphics importer.
Specify the data provider,
and you've got an image ref.
Now you can actually draw it into
the CG image context-- CG context.
When you're working with images,
recognize that the CG image reps
at the moment are not cached.
Possibly that might change in the future,
but at the moment
everything is specified,
it's rendered in the source data format.
So if you're downsampling images
and doing a lot of color matching,
if color matching
becomes an issue for you,
do the caching yourself.
For example,
you may have an iPhoto-like application
where you're drawing a lot of thumbnails.
The best thing is to draw it into
an off-screen bitmap context,
cache the results,
create a new CG image out of it,
and use that where it's already
downsampled for you and the color
matching is already done for
you in the off-screen buffer.
Use the JPEG data providers.
The PNG data providers
that are new for Jaguar.
The benefit there is you are now passing
compressed data as much as possible
through the workflow to the screen.
And it's primarily
important for printing,
so you've got lots of digital
cameras with high quality JPEGs,
3 megapixel JPEGs or whatever.
Use the JPEG data provider.
The spool files that you'll
be generating will be much,
much smaller.
Another point about those data
providers is you can actually
use custom data providers for any
of the non-native formats that
might not be supported by Quark2D.
So even for the JPEG and
PNG data provider,
you can use those.
So you can use not only the convenience
ones that we provide from memory,
from disk, through a URL,
but you can also write your
own custom data provider.
For example, you may want to get the
data from a resource file.
Another common problem that
people ask us about is why
are complicated paths so slow?
There's a difference between what...
The definition of what a complex path is,
as far as Quartz 2D is concerned,
is really dependent on the number
of intersections in that path.
For example, in the bottom left,
I've actually got this pattern,
which is all rendered as one single path.
Now, recognize that there is a difference
between a single path and if this
was represented as multiple paths,
all composed of line segments.
The difference is actually seen
in the intersection region.
So when Quartz actually
scan converts this data,
it takes into account the self
intersections of that path and it
will make sure that it actually
does not do any double drawing.
If you've got a single
hairline pixel wide path,
very likely you may not care
about the intersections because
they're not going to be visible.
So in that case you may want
to use multiple paths instead
of a single complicated path.
There is a difference in the rendering.
If the quality of rendering of a
single path is not as important to you,
go with multiple paths.
They'll be much faster for you.
The other thing to keep in mind is
with multiple paths and single paths,
the difference will also be in your
line joints and your line caps.
So take those into account.
Avoid using line caps and line
joints when not necessary,
especially if you've got
small hairline lines.
Lastly, I just want to cover
another component of course,
which is the CG Direct Display.
This is for applications
that are drawing full screen
applications or games and whatnot.
For Jaguar, we've actually added some new
APIs to actually get at information
about list all the online displays.
We've already had something that would
actually list all the active displays.
It becomes important
when you're mirroring.
There's a difference between
active versus online displays.
Active is the display that is actually--
there's only one single active display.
All the other online displays
are actually mirrored to
that single active display.
We've also got some new
APIs to do some reconfiguring.
Turn on mirroring,
set the origin of displays.
And one new API that you might
be interested in is to check to
see if Quartz Xtreme is actually
running on a particular display.
That can depend from display to display
depending on the video card you have,
whether it's on a PCI bus
or an AGP bus or not.
So you can use that to check to
see if it's actually running.
And also we'll also be providing
you with a new API to actually get
the screen DPI given that we've
got a wide variety of monitors
out there with different DPIs.
Lastly, use your performance
tools like Quartz Debug,
Sampler,
and Sample to profile your applications.
You've heard the mantra before, "Profile,
profile, and then profile some
more." Use those tools.
There's also the other tools.
If you've been at other sessions earlier,
there's the Chud framework that
provides a new performance tool
to get to the processor level.
Those are your Shikari and
your Monster type of tools.
Take advantage of those.
You've got lots of documentation.
The one that I recommend is the
Mac OS X Performance Document.
We've got quite a few
Quartz 2D documents.
And we've also got upcoming tech
notes and QA about some of the
QuickDraw performance issues and
the QuickDraw text aliasing feature.
And now I'd like to invite Travis back
up to go through the rest of the slides.
What I want to do is take a quick
section and just tell you about the one
remaining session we have today at WWDC,
and it's an important one.
It's the feedback forum.
And this is the place where if
you want to give us feedback
on what we've been doing,
obviously for Jaguar
or feedback in general,
please come join us in room J1 at 5:00.
What I'd like to do is let
you have my email address,
even though many of you already know it.
You can contact me at travis@apple.com.
And this is relating to pretty
much most of the graphics stack in
Mac OS X with the exception of OpenGL.
So if you have questions relating to
what was discussed today or if you
have questions relating to printing,
image capture, color sync, Quartz 2D,
feel free to contact me.